First plans for 120-home Smallfield development approved as developers commit to flood reduction measures

Outline planning permission for a new 120-home green belt development at the edge of a Surrey village close to Horley and Gatwick Airport has been granted by the local council. The decision comes a year and a half after an application was first received and despite more than 100 letters of objection.

A number of conditions have been applied to the consent, which must be met at a later stage. This includes with reference to the site’s appearance, scale, and layout, in addition to drainage and other ecological safeguarding considerations.

The exact details of the planned development will be confirmed at a later stage, however, it is understood it could include 12 one-bedroom apartments, 32 two-bedroom terraced houses, 43 three-bedroom terraced or semi-detached houses, and 33 detached houses with four or more bedrooms. 40 per cent of the homes - or 48 units - will be affordable housing and will include different types of home.

Chief among concerns raised by residents and those connected to the area were issues related to school, doctor, dentist, and nursery places, as well as the loss of green space and the risk of flooding. One person claimed: “You are building on green belt in a village being bombarded with planning applications.

“What schools are these new houses going to use? Doctors? Dentists?” They continued: “Having had to apply for nursery places recently, the vast majority of nurseries were full, yet you want to add 120 more houses. There will be no childcare available.”

Drawings show what the estate cold look like once built (Image: Landform)

Landform managing director, Erik Pagano, said developers are “delighted” that outline planning permission has been granted after delays and what he described as “problems” with the local plan. Landform stressed to SurreyLive that the proposal includes community benefits, which it said includes flood risk reduction.

Mr Pagano also described housing demand in the area as high but in in short supply. This is due to an estimated 94 per cent of the district being in the Green Belt. The site is also expected to gain significant interest due to its location close to Gatwick and other major transport links like the M23 and nearby mainline stations to London and the South Coast.